# The Profit Free Pledge (PFP)

This is an effort to encourage transparency in open source software.
Projects that take the Profit Free Pledge affirm that there are no
ulterior motives. Specifically:

 - The software that is being provided open source by a company cannot directly or indirectly contribute to making profits for that company.
 - The majority of contributors represent dispersed community (and not required participants for a company)
 - The community must have completely open communication, meaning all discussion around development is public.
 - All software is provided under an open source license, with no private distributions or versions with special privileges.

By taking the Profit Free Pledge, a community affirms that it provides software under a traditional
open source model, and exists non-selfishly to solve problems for users and
not make profits off of them.

## Background

Open source culture is a powerful force to bring together disparate individuals.
Traditionally, the groups have developed organically, but this practice has changed
as industry has realized the benefit of using the culture for branding. 
People feel good about contributing to, and using software, that is stamped with
open source. People want to participate in open source communities because it reflects
well on them. How then can it be possible to distinguish between a traditional open
source community that grew by way of the value of the software versus one artificially
seeded by way of monetary resources, advertising, and conferences? 

### Artificial Open Source

Artificial Open Source (AOO) describes projects that have likely grown to fame not because
they provided immense value and grew a community, but because an entity with financial means
has invested money and employee resources in creating a culture. This includes 
designating one or more teams of employees to maintain the project, creating advertising
and branding to make the project approachable and endearing, developing training or
certifications to encourage participation, and assembling committees of primarily 
industry maintainers and/or technical oversight boards (TOB).

It has become the case that any corporate entity, given the decision to invest money and employee
resources, can artifically create what looks like an open source community.
From the outside, there is no way to distinguish the two. The metrics that we typically
use, such as GitHub contributors and stars cannot distinguish traditional and artificial
open source. A contributor that browses to a project website is likely to be triggered to
think good incentives when seeing the terms "open source," and get drawn in with
beautiful documentation and attractive project logos. It can be argued that these projects are stifling
others that might have been seen without the artificial noise. 

### Lack of Transparency

Corporate participation, in an of itself, is not a negative thing. However, what
cannot be ignored is the fact that many of these open source technologies are also
provided as services and for consumers to pay for by the industry entity directly.
By way of getting excited about a piece of software, helping to develop or perhaps
implement the consumer gets tied in. Despite being open source, it could be that the technology is unrealistically complicated for a team to set up and manage in house. Given initial
investment, the team has no choice but to pay for the service. It could also be that
the software runs reasonably on a user's host, but optimal performance can only be 
provided by investing in the vendor. It could also be that a piece of software
allows a corporate entity to map a model generated by a user to an internal infrastructure.
No matter how we spin it, if there is some arm for the provider of the software to
make monetary gains, and this reality is hidden behind excitement about open source,
this is not transparent communication.

## The Pledge

How then, do we distinguish between open source software that exists non-selfishly, meaning
it has no ulterior motives toward monetary gain, or using open source to improve a company image.
We ask the community to take a pledge. For projects that exist to further science,
security, or some other selfless function, this pledge will be easy to take. 

### How do I take the pledge?

Taking the pledge comes down to doing a pull request to this repository,
and adding information about your community. We will have more detail on this
process as it is developed.
